---
layout: post
mathjax: true
comments: true
title:  "Problems caused by raw arrays in C++"
author: John Z. Li
date:   2020-08-05 19:44:18 +0800
categories: c++ programming
tags: array
---
All basic types in C++, (bool, char, integer, floating-point number, enum, pointers, union),
except references,
have trivial copy semantics,
which can easily generalized to compound types that consists of basic types.
The copy assignment operator, move constructor and move assignment operator,
, can be
consistently generated by the compiler with well-defined semantics.
That is, copying an object of a class consisting of basic types means a shallow copy, and moving such
an object is like copying but the "moved-from" object should not be used again.
For the reason that the reference types (the lvalue reference type and rvalue reference type)
are mainly used in  function calls,
and seldom used in constructing more complex types, they are deliberately omitted here.
(A class contains a reference type probably implies a design mistake in most cases.)

Semantically, an array is just like a struct, except that
- an array only contains elements of the same type.
- the elements of an array is accessed by array index, while the elements of a struct
are accessed by field names.

Conceptually, arrays should not be so special. A well-designed language should
treat arrays just like a special case of structs, and the semantics of structs naturally
applies to arrays. If this was the case in C++, it would result in a much clearer language:

1. A pointer to an array behaves the same as a pointer to a struct.
2. Passing an array to a function is just like passing a struct, nothing special;
3. Returning an array from a function is just like returning a struct, nothing special.
4. `new` an array is just like `new` a struct. You would not need `new[]` and `delete[]`
anymore. A whole lot of headache would be removed from the language. For example,
you don't have to worry about `delete` a pointer when you really should use `delete[]`
because the chunk of memory is allocated with `new[]`.
5.  Basic types have six relational operators ( ==, <, <=, >, >=, != ) naturally defined with them.
When programmers use basic types as building blocks to form more advanced types,
the six relational operators can be automatically generalized by performing
lexicographical comparison of their corresponding elements. Recall that C strings
are just null terminated char arrays. This means you would be able directly compare
them with  operator `<, <=, > >=`. (You would not need `strcmp`.  Isn't that neat?)
A lot of Math-related code would also benefit from it.
6. Using `make_shared` and `make_unique` with arrays.
7. etc..

The semantics of the array type in C, from which, C++ inherited, is a convenient mistake.
The result is that arrays don’t play well with many parts of C++.
Want to store an array in a STL container? No.
Want to use array in a std::tuple, std::variant, std::optional, std::any? NO, NO, NO, NO.

As an ugly fix,  one could use `std::array` instead in new C++ code. The sad news is that
`std::array` is a class template (meaning long compilation time), and `std::array<T, N>`
is a bit verbose.

